loop customization docs (#9609)
PyTorchLightning/pytorch-lightning: docs/source/extensions/loops.rst

.. _loop_customization:

Loops
=====

Loop customization is an experimental feature introduced in Lightning 1.5 that enables users to swap the built-in Lightning loops with custom ones, providing a unprecedented level of flexibility.
Until now, Lightning did not support well some training paradigms like recommendation engine optimization or active learning.
The loop customization feature will not only enable researchers to customize Lightning down to its very core, but also allow one to build new functionalities on top of it.

.. image:: ../_static/images/extensions/loops/epoch-loop-steps.gif
    :alt: Animation showing how to convert a standard training loop to a Lightning loop

> The training loop in Lightning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Built-in Training Loop
```

------------------------------

Every PyTorch user is familiar with the basic training loop for gradient descent optimization:

.. code-block:: python

    for i, batch in enumerate(dataloader):
        x, y = batch
        y_hat = model(x)
        loss = loss_function(y_hat, y)
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()

At its core, the Lightning Trainer does not do anything different here.
It implements the same loop as shown above except that the research code stays in the LightningModule:

.. code-block:: python

    for i, batch in enumerate(dataloader):
        loss = lightning_module.training_step(batch, i)
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()

> What remains in the Trainer is the loop, :code:`zero_grad()`, :code:`backward()` and :code:`optimizer.step()` calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other operations are automated by the Lightning Trainer: :code:`zero_grad()`, :code:`backward()` and :code:`optimizer.step()` calls.
```

These are considered *boilerplate* and get automated by Lightning.

This optimization scheme is very general and applies to the vast majority of deep learning research today.
However, the loops and optimizer calls here remain predetermined in their order and are fully controlled by the Trainer.

> 

Reviewer: Add a subtitle here

Customized Lightning Loops
----------------------------

> Loop customization now enables a new level of control where also the two remaining `for` loops and more can be fully changed or replaced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new `Loop` class, you can now fully customize the optimization scheme for any use case.
```

Here is how the above training loop can be defined using the new Loop API:

.. code-block:: python

    class EpochLoop(Loop):
        def advance(self):
            i, batch = next(self.iterator)
            loss = lightning_module.training_step(batch, i)
            optimizer.zero_grad()
            loss.backward()
            optimizer.step()

        def run(self, dataloader):
            self.iterator = enumerate(dataloader)
            while True:
                try:
                    self.advance()
                except StopIteration:
                    break

Defining a loop with a class interface instead of hard-coding a raw Python for/while loop has several benefits:

> 1. you can have full control over the data flow through loops

Reviewer: ### 
```suggestion
1. You can have full control over the data flow through loops
```

> 2. you can add new loops and nest as many of them as they want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. you can add new loops and nest as many of them as you want
```

3. if needed, the state of a loop can be saved and resumed

> 4. new hooks can be injected at any point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. New hooks can be injected at any point
```

.. image:: ../_static/images/extensions/loops/replace-fit-loop.gif
    :alt: Animation showing how to replace a loop on the Trainer

The Trainer has four entry points for training, testing and inference, and each method corresponds to a main loop:

.. list-table:: Trainer entry points and associated loops
   :widths: 25 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Entry point
     - Trainer attribute
     - Loop class
   * - :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.fit`
     - :attr:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.fit_loop`
     - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.fit_loop.FitLoop`
   * - :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.validate`
     - :attr:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.validate_loop`
     - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.dataloader.evaluation_loop.EvaluationLoop`
   * - :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.test`
     - :attr:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.test_loop`
     - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.dataloader.evaluation_loop.EvaluationLoop`
   * - :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.predict`
     - :attr:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.predict_loop`

>      - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.dataloader.prediction_loop.PredictionLoop`

Reviewer 2: I really liked the FitLoop being decomposed as before into its part. I believe we might want to keep all this but at the bottom of the page.

More Technical Section.
...

When the user calls :code:`Trainer.<entry-point>`, it redirects to the corresponding :code:`Trainer.loop.run()` which implements the main logic of that particular Lightning loop.
The :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop.run` method is part of the base :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop` class that every loop inherits from (like every model inherits from LightningModule).

> Adding a custom loop for any of these entry points is straightforward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Customizing any of these entry point loops is simple:
```

> **Step 1:** Subclass one of the above loop classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 1:** Subclass one of the above loop classes (or inherit `Loop` to start from scratch)
```

.. code-block:: python

    from pytorch_lightning.loops import FitLoop

    class MyLoop(FitLoop):
        ...

Alternatively, more advanced users can also implement a complete loop from scratch by inheriting directly from the base loop interface as explained later.

**Step 2:** Attach the loop to the Trainer and run it.

.. code-block:: python

    loop = MyLoop()
    trainer = Trainer()

    trainer.fit_loop = loop
    trainer.fit(model)

    # or
    trainer.validate_loop = loop
    trainer.validate(model)

    # or
    trainer.test_loop = loop
    trainer.test(model)

    # or
    trainer.predict_loop = loop
    trainer.predict(model)

Practical example: the training step as a generator
---------------------------------------------------

Lightning supports multiple optimizers and offers a special :code:`training_step` flavor for it, where an extra argument with the current optimizer being used is passed in.

> Take as an example the following training step of a DCGAN from the Lightning Bolts repository:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take as an example the following training step of a DCGAN from the `Lightning Bolts <https://github.com/PyTorchLightning/lightning-bolts/>`_ repository:
```

            )
            result = ClosureResult.from_training_step_output(
                training_step_output,
                self.trainer.accumulate_grad_batches,
            )
            return result

Here we subclass the existing :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.optimization.optimizer_loop.OptimizerLoop` and modify the way it interacts with the model's :code:`training_step`.
The new loop is called :code:`YieldLoop` and contains a reference to the generator returned by the :code:`training_step`.
On every new run (over the optimizers) we call the :code:`training_step` method on the LightningModule which is supposed to return a generator as it contains the :code:`yield` statements.
There must be as many :code:`yield` statements as there are optimizers.

The alternative to this example *manual optimization* where the same can be achieved, but with the generator loop we can still get all benefits of manual optimization without having to call backward or zero grad ourselves.

Given this new loop definition, here is how you connect it to the :code:`Trainer`:

.. code-block:: python

    model = LitModel()
    trainer = Trainer()

    yield_loop = YieldLoop()

>     trainer.fit_loop.epoch_loop.batch_loop.connect(optimizer_loop=yield_loop)

Reviewer: This is different than the explanation at the top, where you just did trainer.fit_loop(loop).

Can you explain why this is required? Or have a more basic example?

    trainer.fit(model)  # runs the new loop!

> Note that we need to connect it to the :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.batch.training_batch_loop.TrainingBatchLoop` as this is the next higher loop above the optimizer loop.

Reviewer: This will be better as a comment in the code + explain this before the code snippet.

This is an appropriate approach when just a few details need change.
But when a loop needs to perform a fundamentally different function, it is better to implement the entire loop by inheriting from the base :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop` interface.

The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop` class is the base for all loops in Lighting just like the LightningModule is the base for all models.
It defines a public interface that each loop implementation must follow, the key ones are:

- :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop.advance`: implements the logic of a single iteration in the loop
- :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop.done`: a boolean stopping criteria
- :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop.reset`: implements a mechanism to reset the loop so it can be restarted

These methods are called by the default implementation of the :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.loops.base.Loop.run` entry point as shown in the (reduced) code excerpt below.

.. code-block:: python

    def run(self, *args, **kwargs):

        self.reset()
        self.on_run_start(*args, **kwargs)

        while not self.done:
            try:

>                 self.advance(*args, **kwargs)

Reviewer 2: Should we add advance_start, advance_end ?

    # Implement the research use-case where we mask labels from labelled dataset.
    datamodule = ActiveLearningDataModule(
        ImageClassificationData.from_folders(train_folder="data/hymenoptera_data/train/", batch_size=2),
        val_split=0.1,
    )

    # 2. Build the task
    head = torch.nn.Sequential(
        torch.nn.Dropout(p=0.1),
        torch.nn.Linear(512, datamodule.num_classes),
    )
    model = ImageClassifier(backbone="resnet18", head=head, num_classes=datamodule.num_classes, serializer=Probabilities())

    # 3.1 Create the trainer
    trainer = flash.Trainer(max_epochs=3)

    # 3.2 Create the active learning loop and connect it to the trainer
    active_learning_loop = ActiveLearningLoop(label_epoch_frequency=1)
    active_learning_loop.connect(trainer.fit_loop)
    trainer.fit_loop = active_learning_loop

    # 3.3 Finetune
    trainer.finetune(model, datamodule=datamodule, strategy="freeze")

    # 4. Predict what's on a few images! ants or bees?
    predictions = model.predict("data/hymenoptera_data/val/bees/65038344_52a45d090d.jpg")
    print(predictions)

    # 5. Save the model!

>     trainer.save_checkpoint("image_classification_model.pt")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    trainer.save_checkpoint("image_classification_model.pt")
    
Here is the `example <https://github.com/PyTorchLightning/lightning-flash/blob/master/flash_examples/integrations/baal/image_classification_active_learning.py>`_.  

Here is the associated `code <https://github.com/PyTorchLightning/lightning-flash/blob/master/flash/image/classification/integrations/baal/loop.py#L31>`_.  
```
